Dr. Aliabadi’s Elective DoubleMastectomy JourneyDo Labia Change with Age?Yes – Here Are Five Ways Sickness From an OB/GYN What Happens If You QuitSmoking by 35? ABOUT OBSTETRICS GYNECOLOGY MENOPAUSE SURGERY WEIGHT LOSS COSMETICS BLOG APPOINTMENTS SPECIALTIESINCLUDE:Home→The Women’s Health Blog→Frustrated By Brain Fog? How Pregnancy Actually Alters Your Brain STAY INFORMED! SUBSCRIBE TOEndometriosis Myomectomy Outpatient PCOS Minimally Invasive Medical Weight MonaLisaHysterectomy Surgeries Loss Touch THE WOMEN’S HEALTH BLOG Frustrated By Brain Fog? How Pregnancy Actually EmailAlters Your Brain SUBMITByDR. ALIABADI EDUCATION TEAMon02/24/23(last updated on 03/07/2023) <PREVIOUS | ARTICLE | NEXT> EXPLORE DR. ALIABADI’SARTICLES BY CATEGORY: Select Category ?What is brain fog Listen to this content00:00 / 11:23 SEARCH BLOG Brain fog, aka mental fog, is a feeling that you don’t have full mental clarity. It’s a term used for Search our site... certain symptoms that can make a difference in cognitive function. These symptoms include: decreased focusmemory problemsmemory lossimpaired problem-solving abilityforgetfulnessBrain fog itself is not a medical condition or a clinical diagnosis. But it can be one of several signs ofa health problem that needs a doctor’s care. SEARCHWhat causes brain fog?There are multiple factsleep deprivationors and health conditions that can cause brain fog, including: lack of sleepincreased stress levelanxietydepressiondementiahormone levels associated with perimenopause effects of pregnancymedicationthyroid disordersmultiple sclerosisvitamin B12 deficiencyviral infections, such as COVID-19, SARS, and H1N1What is pregnancy brain fog?Pregnancy brain is a real phenomenon consisting of commonly experienced cognitive changes thatoccur in women during pregnancy and postpartum. The pregnancy brain symptoms mostfrequently reported are: forgetfulnessmemory lapsespoor concentrationabsentmindednessclumsinessWhen does pregnancy brain (baby brain) start? Pregnancy brain, aka early pregnancy brain fog and “mommy brain,” starts in the first trimester when hormones begin to fluctuate.It refers to experiences like forgetting your phone number,where you put the car keys, or facts that were once easilyrecalled. These are all part of a spectrum of behavioral changes.Luckily, pregnancy and brain fog have been researched anddocumented.The Mayo Clinic reviewed 20 studies that involved more than700 pregnant women and 500 non-pregnant women. They found that pregnant women displayed poorer cognitivefunctioning, memory, and executive functioning than their non-pregnant counterparts.Interestingly, they found that these changes do not affect jobperformance. Instead, these changes were only noticeable inclose relationships and the pregnant person themselves.What causes brain fog during pregnancy?Factmay help explain why the alors such as surging hormone levels and new life prioritiesterations in brain function occur. Atany given time, what causes pregnancy brain is likely one ormore of the following factHormonal changesors: Studies of pregnant women have related the fluctuations of progesterone and estrogen duringpregnancy to attention, memory, and executive function impairment, as the brain is sensitive to changes in hormone levels.Progesterone Progesterone is crucial to pregnancy as it maintains the body’s ability to remain pregnant.This hormone is responsible for relaxing the uterus so it doesn’t reject the fetus.Progesterone also has a sedative effect, which can make it difficult for pregnant women tostay alert and focused. The rise in this hormone can have an impact on the cognitiveabilities of some women (casually called “momnesia”).EstrogenDuring pregnancy, estrogen assists in uterine growth and fetal development. It alsoincreases blood flow, which heightens the sense of smell and gives that well-knownpregnancy “glow.” Estrogen levels continue to rise throughout pregnancy and peak in thethird trimester.However, postpartum your estrogen levels will fall again and the sudden decrease in thishormone can cause brain fog.RelaxinRelaxin keeps the uterus relaxed during the first trimester and assists in placental growth.It enables the pelvis to expand during birth by increasing the laxity (looseness) in thesurrounding ligaments. While it doesn’t directly impact your brain, this hormone explainsclumsiness and being prone to falls during pregnancy.WANT A CONSULTATION WITH DR. ALIABADI?REQUEST YOUR APPOINTMENT NOW Physical brain changes Does the brain shrink during pregnancy? Yes and no.The processes occurrhuman brain structure. ing during pregnancy happen on a cellular level and facilitate changes inA 2016 study in Nature Neurosciencefocused on pregnancy and brainchanges. The study determined there are physiological changes that occur in a women’s brain structure. These changes include:Decrease in gray matter volume Gray matter in the brain undergoes the most important changes. These changes are known as neural pruning — since the amount of gray matter decreases. Neural pruning allows for greater sensitivity to suffering – enhancing the senses for the task of caring for a baby.One studyfound that gray matter volume shrinks in areas of the brain associated withprocessing and responding to social signals, or social cognition.The study’s lead author,Elseline Hoekzema, suggests the loss of brain volume in these areas may indicate aprocess of maturation and specialization. This allows new moms to become more focusedand attuned to the needs of their infants.The alterations in gray matlinked to a strongerparentter volume endure for at least two years after childbirth and are-Neurons increase in size child bond. FOR YOU, FROM OUR BLOG Another change occurring in the brain FDA Names Potentially Bad Ingredients during pregnancy is in an area known in Sunscreen: What you need to know as thehypothalamus. There is anincrease in the size of neurons in thisCan I have a healthy pregnancy after area, which enhances their sensitivity recurrent miscarriage?and activity.There is an increase in sensitivity toWorried About Itchy Boobs? Dr. Aliabadismell and taste. Another consequence in Women's Health Magazine of this alteration is an intense feeling ofwell-being.This sensitivity strengthensthe mother-baby bond just by touchingher pregnant bellyThis change in the brain causes physical discomfort when the mother separates from thebaby in the first months after birth.Reduction in size of the amygdalaDuring pregnancy, the amygdala becomes smaller.This area of the brain is responsible fordecisions made in response to fear. Many mothers develop a brain less prone toimpulsively react to fear. This allows a mother to engage in a variety of ways to preservethe child’s lifeSleep deprivationSleep deprivation during pregnancy is quite common and is the result of multiple factorsincluding:increased urinationdiscomfort due to striking physical changes in the bodyheartburnthe baby’s movement and kickingpain in the legs, hips, and back pregnancy rhinitisAnxiety and stressEven when a woman has mastered multitasking and organizational skills, the inability to focusduring pregnancy can cause frustration, anxiety, and stress. Pregnant women may be mentallyoverwhelmed and more focused on what’s to come, instead of what’s happening now.A pregnant woman’s physiology changes at the time of conception. Her attention may become diverted by the reality of becoming a mom or focused on the rapid physical changes occurringin her body.It’s possible that brain power is being allocated to the new mind-body state, and thereforemental energy is being tapped from elsewhere.Does menopause cause brain fog?Many menopausal symptoms — including hot flashes, mood swings, and brain fog — are tied tofluctuating estrogen levels. A common complaint during menopause is brain fog, includingproblems with memory, confusion, and a wandering mind. These symptoms are often related tomenopausal fatigue.A2021 study scanned the brains of 161 women between the ages of 40 and 65 who were in variousstages of the perimenopausal and post-menopausal transition. The results demonstrated thefollowing brain changes during menopause, including:a decrease in gray and white matteran increase in beta-amyloid protein depositsa decrease in glucose, the main fuel source for your body’s cells Estrogen plays a role in all these changes. “We think about this hormone as mainly a reproductive hormone, but it’s actually the ‘master regulator’ of the female brain. Itliterally pushes neurons to burn glucose tomake energy,” says Lisa Mosconi, director ofthe Women’s Brain Initiative and associate director of the Alzheimer’s Prevention Clinicat Weill Cornell Medical College/NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital. Estrogen is involved in brain growth,plasticity, and immunity. As a result, it keepsthe brain younger and healthier. As estrogendeclines with age, the neuronal connectionsbegin to decrease and slow down.Menopause-related symptoms like brain fog— manifesting as memory lapses,forgetfulness, fatigue, and anxiety — aredirectly related to a decrease in estrogen. There are steps you can take to manage brain fog whether you’re pregnant, postpartum, perimenopausal, or menopausal. ContactDr. Aliabadifor guidance on how to implement short-term adaptive strategies and manage everyday tasks, while maintaining a healthy pregnancy.Have pregnancy questions? Talk to Dr. AliabadiWhether you’re struggling with pregnancy brain fog, thinking about expanding your family, or justlooking for a good OB/GYN in Beverly Hills, Dr. Aliabadi wants to hear from you. Together with herwarm professional team, Dr. Aliabadi supports women through all phases of life. She fosters aspecial one-on-one relationship between patient and doctor.We invite you to establish care with Dr. Aliabadi. Please make an appointment online or call us at (844) 863-6700.We take our patients’ safety very seriously. Our facility’s Covid-19 patient safety procedures exceed allCDC and World Health Organization recommendations. Masks are required in our office at all timesduring the coronavirus pandemic.The practice of Dr. Thais Aliabadi and the Outpatient Hysterectomy Center is conveniently located for patients throughout Southern California and the Los Angeles area. We are near Beverly Hills,West Hollywood, Santa Monica, West Los Angeles, Culver City, Hollywood, Venice, Marina del Rey,Malibu, Manhattan Beach, and Downtown Los Angeles. About LatestPosts Dr. Aliabadi Education TeamDr. Aliabadi and her medical practice associates work hard to empower their patients andwebsite visitors with the most up-to-date information about pregnancy and gynecological care.Our goal is to pass on truly useful information to our readers. We hope you enjoy our work andfind it of value. Please let us know! <PREVIOUS | ARTICLE | NEXT> Filed Under:Menopause,Pregnancy WHAT PATIENTS SAY ABOUTDR. ALIABADI…4.9Out of5Stars Overallratingof174, 51stpartyreviews ViewFilters F APiyaS.February 8,20241)wishIwasgivenphysicalscriptsforallmydiagnostics(Ihadtorequestthefrontdesk check outstaffforthem whenIwascheckingoutandthe...ReadMore E5outof5stars MadelaineE. February 8,2024Gratefulfortheexcellentcare.E5outof5stars BSharonD.February 7,2024Iam always buggingyouallviatext!thankyouforputtingup withme!youareallawesome :-) E5outof5stars D 1 2 3 4...121 APoweredbyAFarSiteBetter,LBLC ARTICLES FOR YOU FROM OURWOMEN’S HEALTH BLOG Best Remedies for Morning Inspires Others WANT A CONSULTATION WITH DR. ALIABADI?REQUEST YOUR APPOINTMENT NOW DR. ALIABADI IS CONSISTENTLY VOTEDBEST OBGYN DOCTORBY HER PEERS: 2018 Top Doctors 2018 Leading 2017 America's Best 2016 Top Doctors Los 2016 Leading 2015 Top Doctors Los Los Angeles Physicians of the Physicians Angeles Magazine Physicians of the Angeles Magazine Magazine World World About Office Tour Obstetrics Gynecology Menopause Gynecological Surgeries Cosmetics Medical Weight Loss Los Angeles Testimonials Financing Patient Portal Contact Us Appointment Request Home Thaïs Aliabadi, MD Let’s Follow Dr. Aliabadi! Obstetrics, Gynecology &Infertility Any medical or health advice provided and hosted on this site will only be given by medically !"#$ 433 N. Camden Drive, Suite 1130 trained and qualified professionals unless a clear statement is made that a piece of advice Beverly Hills, CA 90210 ofered is from a non-medically qualified individual or organization. The information provided on Download Our vCard(844)863-6700 this site is designed to support, not replace, the relationship that exists between a patient/site Request an Appointment visitor and his/her existing physician. website byA Far Site Better Privacy Policy Review Policy Good Faith Estimate Open Payments Database Message us 