Health»Live TV International Edition + !!Share this on: Mixx Facebook Twitter Digg delicious reddit MySpace StumbleUpon Pregnancy does cause memory loss, study says Story HighlightsStudy: Pregnant women do experience a slight loss of memoryIn many cases, the forgetfulness can continue for a year after birthUsually involves unfamiliar or demanding tasksMore research needed to determine causes Next Article in Health » From Saeed Ahmed CNN (CNN) -- Science has now confirmed what expectant moms already know: Carrying a baby makes them more forgetful. art.pg.torso.gi.jpg Researchers suspect that pregnant women's forgetfulness stems from hormone shifts and lifestyle changes. A recent study by two Australian researchers has found that pregnant women do experience a slight loss of memory -- and in many cases, the forgetfulness continues after birth. The memory loss is subtle, and usually involves unfamiliar or demanding tasks, Dr. Julie Henry, one of the authors of the study, told CNN on Tuesday. "What we found is that memory tasks which are more challenging or more novel, or those that would require multitasking -- these types of tasks are likely to be disrupted," said Henry, a seniorlecturer in Sydney's University of New South Wales. For example, a pregnant woman is more likely to forget a new telephone number, but she is able to recall a number she has dialed many times before, Henry said. Henry and her colleague, Dr. Peter Rendell of Melbourne's Australian Catholic University, analyzed 14 studies from around the world that tested the memory performances of more than 1,000women -- expectant women, mothers and non-pregnant females. The study, published in the Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, found that the memory loss can extend up to a year after birth. The researchers could not establish whether the forgetfulness lasts longer because none of the research they analyzed went beyond the one-year observational period. Don't Miss MayoClinic.com: Pregnancy Center Henry and Rendell said that more research is needed to determine what causes the loss at such a critical period of a woman's life. It may result from hormonal changes or from a lifestyle shift,Henry said. "You're probably more preoccupied with the upcoming birth and (how) your whole life is going to be changing," she said. "You're going to have more difficult sleeping. And other studies haveshown that sleep deficiency definitely disrupts cognitive performance. There's no reason to think it won't do so during pregnancy." So, has Henry experienced the syndrome firsthand? "I haven't yet," she said, laughing. "It hasn't put me off." E-mail to a friend From the Blogs: Controversy, commentary, and debate Top News From psychiatrist to'Butcher of Bosnia' Why trial could take years Search CNN Health... ! World US Politics Business Tech Sport US 2020 Election Markets Movies Innovate Football Africa Facts First Tech Television Gadget Tennis Americas Election 101 Media Celebrity Foreseeable Future Equestrian Asia Success Mission: Ahead Golf Australia Perspectives Upstarts US Sports China Video Business Evolved Climbing Europe Work Transformed Formula E Middle East Innovative Cities F1 India UK Features Video More… Destinations Arts Food Freedom Project Video news Weather Food & Drink Design Fitness Impact Your World Feature shows CNN Profiles Stay Fashion Wellness Inside Africa HLN Leadership News Architecture Parenting 2 degrees TV shows Pressroom Videos Luxury Live Longer CNN Heroes TV schedule Partner sites Video Call to Earth Faces of CNN Worldwide Work for CNN As Equals CNNVR All Features " International Edition + © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Media Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network. Terms of Use | Privacy Policy | Accessibility & CC | Ad Choices | Modern Slavery Act Statement | Advertise with us | About us | CNN Store | Newsletters | Transcripts | License Footage | CNN Newsource 