Epidural for labor painReviewed by Cheryl Axelrod, M.D., ob-gyn of laborReviewed by Cheryl Axelrod,M.D., ob-gyn drop?Reviewed by Cheryl Axelrod,M.D., ob-gyn biggest dangers towatch forReviewed by Shawnté James,M.D., neonatal and pediatrichospitalist Join nowto personalizeBabyCenter for your pregnancy Login | Sign upCommunity Getting Pregnant Pregnancy Baby Names Baby Toddler Child Health Family Courses Registry Builder Baby Products Advertisement Pregnancy / Your BodyWhat is pregnancy brain? FEATURED VIDEOPregnancy brain refers to forgetfulness and memory problems that some womenreport having during pregnancy. But is pregnancy brain real? Inside pregnancy: Weeks 1 to 9MedicallyreviewedbyLayan Alrahmani, M.D., ob-gyn, MFMWrittenbyColleen de Bellefonds| Sep 28, 2021 Advertisement Inthis article Isawordoftenonthetipofyourtongue?Doyouforgetyourkeysnearlyeverytimeyouleave home?Ifyou'repregnant,youmightblameoccasionalmemorylapsesonpregnancybrain.Andresearchsuggestsyoumayhavegoodreason:Forgetfulnessduringpregnancyappearstobea real phenomenon. Here's why you might experience pregnancy brain fog – and how tocope. Photo credit:Thinkstock/Stockbyte Do you need cervical checks 00060024Top Stories byBabyCenter What is pregnancy brain?Pregnancy brain (sometimes called "momnesia" or "baby brain") refers to the cognitivestruggles and brain fog that some women say they experience during pregnancy andsometimes after birth. It involves symptoms including:memory problemsforgetfulnesspoor concentraabsentmindednesstion •clumsinessdisorientation readingdifficultiesWhen does pregnancy brain start?•troublerecalling words and namesWhilethere'snoscientificconsensusonwhenpregnancybrainstarts,researchandanecdotal stories from moms suggest that pregnancy brain is worst in the third trimester.That said, some studies have found that memory loss and other cognitive problems maybegin as early as the first trimester of pregnancy.Is pregnancy brain real?Plentyofexpectantmomssaythatpregnancybrainisreal.Andsomeresearchsuggeststhatup to 81 percent of pregnant women report having memory lapses or focus problems.However,theoverallscientificevidenceismixed. Advertisement | page continues below Some studies show pregnant women have significantly worse memory and cognitivefunction than those who aren't pregnant, especially in the third trimester. Other researchshows that pregnant women do just as well on cognitive tests as women who aren'tpregnant.A 2018 analysis of 20 studies on pregnancy brain found that compared to non-pregnantwomen,pregnantwomenperformedworseontestsinvolvingmemoryandexecutivefunction – that is, cognitive function related to organizing tasks, remembering details,managing time, and problem-solving.Whilethecausesofpregnancybrainfogareunclear,thereareseveraltheories: Advertisement | page continues below •Hormones.Pregnancy sends a flood of fluctuating hormones throughout your body. Thistriggers major physiological changes and may possibly also affect the brain and memory.•Troublesleeping.More than half of women reportinsomniaand othersleep problemsduring pregnancy. A consistent lack of sleep has been shownto impact cognitivefunctions and memory.•Stressandanxiety.It makes sense intuitively: You may be distracted by worry orexcitementaboutthisnewadventureandthemajorlifechangesitwillbring,whichcaninterfere with your ability to concentrate and remember things.•Changesin brain structure. A few small studies suggest that women experience changesto their brain structure during pregnancy. These changes may last for at least six yearsafter giving birth. Researchers theorize that the body is getting rid of neural networks itdoesn't need to make the brain more efficient and specialized for motherhood, whichmay help women to bond with and respond to their babies. They further speculate thatchanges in brain structure might be associated with impaired memory.Keepinmind:Theresearchisn'tclearthatpregnancybrainexistsorthatitaffectseveryexpectingmom.Pre nantwomenwhodonoticeittypicallyexperienceminor,manageableforgetfulness.Havingpregnancybraindoesn'tmeanyouaren'tassmartandcapableasever.How to cope with pregnancy brainFortunately,youcanmakesmallchangestomanageforgetfulnessduringpregnancy.Trythese strategies to help you cope with pregnancy brain fog and memory loss:•Keyoue .padailycalendar.Use the calendar app on your phone, or carry a small planner with•Giveimportantobjectsa"home."Store things you use often, such as keys, in the sameplace. Or, invest in some high-tech trackers for your keys and wallet.•Setalarms and notifications.Schedule alerts for important meetings or tasks on yourphone or computer.•Takesnapshots.If you park your car in a large or crowded lot, snap a photo of thelocation with your phone. You can also use photos to save visual notes of things likeslides at a meeting, event flyers, business cards, and magazine articles.•Useanote-takingapp.Use an app on your phone to keep track of importantinformation.•Trymnemonicdevices.When you meet someone new, think of an association to helpyouremembertheperson'sname.Forexample,ifyoumeetsomeonenamedLily,imagineher holding a bouquet of lilies.•Carrya notebook.Write down everything in a small notebook. It doesn't need to be fancy–just having everything in one place makes it easier to refresh your memory.•Trytogetgoodsleep.It can be hard tosleep well during pregnancy, but getting enoughsleep will refresh your memory help you stay alert mentally.•Exercise.Workingoutregularly(with your healthcare provider's approval) not only keepsyouhealthy during pregnancy, it can also sharpen your memory and help you sleepbetter at night, increasing your alertness during the day.•Askforhelp.Ask your partner, family, or friends to pitch in with chores, errands, andchildcare. A lightened load means lessstress, which can affect your ability to rememberthings.•Simplify.Take a break from multitasking and prioritize what's necessary and what's not.Save your energy for the things that are really important to you.A little forgetfulness during pregnancy is normal. However, if you're having a lot of troublethinking or concentrating, if you're feeling sad every day for most of the day, or if younotice a loss of interest or pleasure in things you normally enjoy, you could be sufferingfrompregnancy depression. Advertisement | page continues below Any time you're feeling unusually sad or overwhelmed, talk to your doctor or midwife soyoucangetthehelpyouneed. Was this article helpful? Yes No Natural ways to induce laborByClaudia Boyd-BarrettWhat do contractions feel like?ByDarienne Hosley StewartGroup B streptococcus screeningByKaren MilesWhat it feels like when your water breaksByStephanie Watson Track your pregnancy on ourfree #1 pregnancy & baby app Sources Colleen de BellefondsRecognizing the signsWhen will my babyColleen de Bellefonds is a freelance health and lifestyle journalist. She's raising hertoddler daughter and newborn son with her French husband in Paris. Advertisement 2weekspregnant 3weekspregnant 4weekspregnant 5weekspregnant 6weekspregnant 7weekspregnant 8weekspregnant 9weekspregnant 10weekspregnant Advertisement Search BabyCenter The#1 appGet the BabyCenter appfor tracking pregnancy and babygrowth. Newborn safety: The My pregnancy week by week BabyCenter is your parenting partner.BabyCenter is committed to providingthe most helpful and trustworthy pregnancy and parenting informationin the world. Ourcontent isaward-winning articlesanddoctor approvedandcommunity groups,you can track your pregnancy and baby's growth, get answers to yourevidence based, and our community is moderated, lively, and welcoming. With thousands oftoughest questions, and connect with moms, dads, and expectant parents just like you. About BabyCenter Other sitesBabyCenter apps Do not sell my personal BabyCenter en Español BabyCenter IndiainformationAbout us BabyCenter Australia BabyCentre UKFreebies & DealsAwards BabyCenter BrazilPopular topicsMedical Advisory Board BabyCenter CanadaHelp CenterCareers BabyCenter GermanyContact UsAdvertise with us Community GuidelinesPress CenterPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseAccessibilityAd Choices Connect with us BabyCenter supportsBlack's collective includes © 1997-2024 BabyCenter, LLC, a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved.BabyCenter is designed for educational purposes only. Consult with a medical professional if you have health concerns. Use of this site issubject to ourTerms of UseandPrivacy Policy. Group Blackand its mission to increase greater diversity in media voices and media ownership. GroupEssence,The Shade RoomandNaturally Curly. 