GO TO EUDAT WEBSITE DATA CATALOGUE REPOSITORIES PROJECTS ABOUT !/ Dataset / Cognition in Pregnancy:... $ Organization # Dataset Cognition in Pregnancy: Perceptions and Performance, 2005-2006 " DOI Abstract copyright UK Data Service and data collection copyright owner. Pregnant women consistently report that their memory and attention abilities become worse during pregnancy. However, their perception of changes is not well supported by comparisons of performance between pregnant and non-pregnant women on laboratory cognitive tasks. The aim of this project was to investigate two possible reasons for this discrepancy. The first possibility is that there are real changes but these are so mild that they are usually only noticeable in complex everyday situations and are rarely demonstrable in the simple tasks typically used to examine the effects of pregnancy on cognition. The second possibility is that there are no actual changes and the perception of worsening ability arises from a negative stereotype which makes pregnant women more aware of the kinds of cognitive slips everyone makes which are then attributed to pregnancy. The project comprised three studies. The possibility that there are real but subtle changes in cognition was examined in Study 1 by comparing the performance of 50 first-time pregnant women in middle and late pregnancy and 25 non-pregnant, childless women on a range of sensitive cognitive tests using familiar everyday scenarios, and in Study 3 by comparing the performance of 13 pregnant women with that of 17 non-pregnant, childless women on two cognitively complex driving simulation tasks. All women also provided self-ratings of cognitive changes. Study 2 investigated the existence of a social stereotype: 99 female and 55 male participants with immediate experience of pregnancy (pregnant women and their partners), and 100 female and 100 male participants with little experience of pregnancy rated the likelihood of cognitive and other changes women may experience during pregnancy. Main Topics: The dataset consists of the data from all three studies within the project. For Study 1, 25 women in their second trimester of pregnancy, 25 women in their third trimester of pregnancy, and 25 non-pregnant, childless women provided self-ratings for 15 cognitive and 6 emotional changes that may accompany pregnancy. Pregnant women rated changes since becoming pregnant, non-pregnant women made comparisons with one year ago. They also indicated which of a number of possible reasons might account for the changes, noted any other changes they had experienced, and gave personal examples. In addition, all women provided data from 13 subtasks from four published tests covering a range of memory and attention functions: the Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test, Speed and Capacity of Language-Processing Test, Behavioural Assessment of Dysexecutive Syndrome and the Test of Everyday Attention (references given below). For Study 2, 99 female and 55 male participants with immediate experience of pregnancy (pregnant women and their partners), and 100 female and 100 male participants with little experience of pregnancy provided the same ratings as in Study 1, but this time the ratings referred to their perception of changes experienced by pregnant women in general. The pregnant women and their partners also provided ratings which related to the pregnant participant rather than pregnant women in general. For Study 3, 13 pregnant and 17 non-pregnant, childless women who provided information relating to their driving experience, and measures from a braking task and a junction task in a driving simulator. They also provided the same self-ratings as participants in Study 1. Standard Measures: The ratings were made on seven-point Likert scales using a rating scale devised specifically for the study. The cognitive tasks in Study 1 were taken from four published tests:Wilson, B., Cockburn, J. and Baddeley, A. (1991) The Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test, 2nd edition, Bury St. Edmunds: Thames Valley Test CompanyBaddeley, A., Emslie, H. and Nimmo-Smith, I. (1992) The Speed and Capacity of Language-Processing Test, Bury St. Edmunds: Thames Valley Test CompanyWilson, B.A., Alderman, N., Burgess, P.W., Emslie, H. and Evans, J. (1996) Behavioural Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome, Bury St. Edmunds: Thames Valley Test CompanyRobertson, I.H., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V. and Nimmo Smith, I. (1994) The Test of Everyday Attention, Bury St. Edmunds: Thames Valley Test Company Volunteer sample Face-to-face interview Telephone interview Psychological measurements 2005 2006 AGE CHILDREN COGNITIVE PROCESSES DRIVING EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND EMOTIONAL STATES England FATIGUE PHYSIOLOGY Health History MARITAL STATUS MEMORY PERCEPTION PERFORMANCE PREGNANCY PREGNANCY COMPLICAT... PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS PSYCHOMETRICS Psychology WOMEN CESSDA CESSDA provides large-scale, integrat ed and sustainable data services to th e social sciences. It brings together so cial science data archives across Euro pe, with the aim of... read more % Social & Twitter ' Facebook Identifier DOI http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-5615-1 Metadata Access https://datacatalogue.cessda.eu/oai-pmh/v0/oai? verb=GetRecord&metadataPrefix=oai_ddi25&identifier= 04f00dfbf936d557d94d164bab0a15aae852513dd3a514 5cf43e7f56418365fb Provenance Creator Crawley, R., University of Sunderland, Sunderland Business School Publisher UK Data Service Publication Year 2007 Funding Reference Economic and Social Research Council Rights Copyright R. Crawley; <p>The Data Collection is available to UK Data Service registered users subject to the <a href="https://ukdataservice.ac.uk/app/uploads/cd137enduserlicence.pdf" target="_blank">End User Licence Agreement</a>.</p><p>Commercial use of the data requires approval from the data owner or their nominee. The UK Data Service will contact you.</p> OpenAccess true Representation Language English Resource Type Numeric Discipline History; Humanities; Life Sciences; Medicine; Medicine and Health; Physiology; Psychology; Social and Behavioural Sciences Spatial Coverage Tyne and Wear; England EUDAT Service ToU Data Privacy Policy Legal Notice About EUDAT © 2019 EUDAT Collaborative Data Infrastructure Powered by CKAN B2FIND is co-funded by the EOSC-hub project (Horizon 2020) under Grant number 777536 