Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE Health Conditions Discover Plan Connect SUBSCRIBE PARENTHOOD Stages Infertility Health & Well-Being Life Sex & Relationships Products & Gear Is Pregnancy Brain Real?What it is Causes What you can do Takeaway You expect all the physical changes that occur in pregnancy: a burgeoning belly, swollencalves, and — if you’re really lucky —pregnancy hemorrhoidstransformations, there are mental shifts and actual physiological. But in addition to these telltalebrain alterationsthat happen,too.If you’re feeling forgetful, absentminded, or just plain out of it, you’re not imagining things. It’snot regular day-to-day distraction at play — “pregnancy brain” is a real thing.And while it can provide somehumorin the moment (like, when you forget your date of birth ata prenatal appointment or discover you’ve shoved the car keys in the freezer — again!), it canalso be frustrating and worrisome.Want to understand the science driving this silliness and get some tips to help lift the fog?We’ve got your back — and your brain — covered.ADVERTISEMENT What is pregnancy brain?During pregnancy and beyond, you may find yourself struggling to remember details, focus ontasks, or give your undivided attention to just about anything. This is casually referred to as“pregnancy brain” or “mommy brain.”Pregnancy brain may begin as early as the first trimester of pregnancy, as this is when yourbody gets a major surge of hormones.Insomniaexasperate this state of mental mushiness, too., a common affliction in early pregnancy, canIf you’re hoping the clouds will clear upon baby’s arrival, you’re in for a rude awakening.Hormones will continue to fluctuate postpartum and, of course, the sleep deprivation is justgetting started.You may feel more like yourself around 6 months after birth, if your hormone levels regulate, orit could last well into your child’s toddler years. Hold on to your thinking cap, it’s going to be awild ride!What causes pregnancy brain?An expecting parent will experience several physical and mental changes that can lead topregnancy brain. But, while anecdotal evidence of temporary cognitive decline is strong, theresearch has yielded mixed results.A2014 studyfound that while pregnant women and new moms reported more memory lossand forgetfulness than a control group of nonpregnant women, actual neuropsychologicalmeasurements showed little to no difference in the brain function of the two groups.Still, other research — and a hearty dose of common sense — can pinpoint a few keycontributors. At any given time, the effects of pregnancy brain are likely caused by one or moreof these factors.Hormonal changesAh,hormones— the veritable scapegoat of pregnancy problems. Experiencing an acne flareup?Having mood swings? Sore breasts? Hormones, hormones, hormones.It comes as no surprise, of course, that hormones are, indeed, a major player in all sorts ofpregnancy-related afflictions.Your body experiences a major surge of various hormones, such as progesterone andestrogen, during pregnancy — and some doctors and scientists believe that this dramatic spikecould affect your ability to think clearly, recall easily, and focus mindfully.One2014 studyfound that pregnant women in their second trimester and beyond scorednoticeably lower than non-pregnant women on Spatial Recognition Memory (SRM) tests. Inother words, they had trouble remembering locations and spacial relations between differentobjects.So if you can’t find your cell phone, it may not be your fault. Blame it on the hormones — andgive yourself a call (assuming you can remember your own phone number).Sleep deprivationAt some point during pregnancy, most women will experience some degree of insomnia. Manymoms-to-be will suffer fromextreme exhaustionin the first trimester, and may never feel fullyrested.Plus, early nagging symptoms such asheartburnleg crampsfrom getting the slumber she so desperately needs., , andnauseamay keep a womanOther expecting mamas will have a much harder time sleeping soundly later in pregnancy.Finding a comfortable position is a nearly impossible feat, aches and pains may be incessant,and you could be getting up to pee every half an hour.Suffice to say, quality sleep is limited during those 9 tiresome months, and it is only thebeginning of this exhaustive roller coaster.Sleep deprivationcan cause you to feel completely out of sorts. It can affect your mood andmemory. When you sleep, your brain makes critical connections that help you processinformation — so losing those all-important Zzz’s could be why you’realsolosing your train ofthought.Stress and anxietyIt’s safe to say that you have a lot weighing on your mind when you’re pregnant. You’re aboutto bring new life into the world — it’sheavyand exciting and totally overwhelming all at once.You have preparations to make, appointments to keep, and tasks to accomplish. To top it off,you might be dealing with the very real and legitimate fear of childbirth.So, yes, you have your fair share (and then some) on your proverbial plate, clogging up yourmental space. It’s no surprise you may be having difficulty focusing.Physical changes in the brainAs it turns out, there may be even more happening on a cellular level that’s further fuelingpregnancy brain.A2016 study& determined that there are undeniable physiological changes that occur in thestructure of allwomen’s brains during pregnancy.Scans showed that pregnant women will categorically experience a significant decrease in graymatter volume in areas of the brain that help with social cognition. These changes were alsofound to occur in parts of the brain that foster relationship building.This could be the brain’s way of clearing space to make room formaternal attachmentwhile you may not be able to recall if you brushed your teeth in the morning, youwillbe ready. So,to snuggle down like a mama bear.Interestingly, follow-up scans showed that these volume changes can last for 2 years or more,meaning some aspects of pregnancy brain might stick around through your child’s toddleryears. ADVERTISEMENTFind nannies you can trustCare․com requires all caregivers to complete backgroundchecks before interacting with families. Create a free accountto start browsing. What can you do about pregnancy brain?LEARN MORE You don’t need to throw in the towel and accept your forgetful fate just yet. There are somebrain-boosting steps you can take to sharpen your mental acuity.Get sleepSleep can be elusive in pregnancy and completely evasive in those early postpartum weeksand months.Taking a few measures to try toquiet your mindand relax your body can help cultivate a morerestful environment. Establish anevening routine, turn off your cell phone, and do somebreathing exercises.During sleep, your brain can form important connections that help encourage cognitivefunction — so do what you can to prioritize rest.When all else fails, acat napcan help. Twenty minutes of shut-eye will do the trick. A longernap may sound tempting, but can leave you feeling groggy, as you will transition into a deeperstage of sleep — so keep the midday snoozes short and sweet.Eat wellYou may have intense cravings and an insatiable appetite during pregnancy, and we supportyour need to feed, but wealsosuggest adding a few key ingredients to your next meal.Certainfoodshigh in antioxidants and vitamins have been proven to help with brain function.Here are a few to add to your upcoming grocery list:Omega-3fatty acids.Salmon and other fatty fish are loaded with DHA and omega-3 fattyacidsthat help to build brain cells needed for cognition and memory.Blueberries.Rich in color and flavor, blueberries have antioxidants that fight brain-fogginginflammationand help boost communication between brain cells.Eggs.Egg yolks have a high concentration of choline, a nutrient that makes acetylcholine,whichhelps stabilize mood and improve memory.Spinach.Leafy green veggies are chock-full of vitamin K, folate, and other brain-empoweringvitamins and minerals that can help fuel your ability to think and recall.HydrateDrinking water is always vital, but it is arguably even more important during pregnancy andthroughout your postpartum recovery — especially if you’re breastfeeding.Your brain needs water to function properly. Even milddehydrationcan have adverse effectson your ability to concentrate and totally zap your energy level — so drink up to perk up.Set remindersIf you’re having trouble remembering things or maintaining focus, set yourself up for successby employing a few simple mind-triggering tactics.There’s no need to tie a string around your swollen finger — just leave yourself sticky noteswith simple reminders and friendly FYIs. A daily agenda planner can help you feel lessscatterbrained and more organized. Use your smartphone — set alarms and fill in yourcalendar.Play brain-boosting gamesJust like your muscles need exercise to reach peak performance, your brain will benefit from amental workout, too. Crossword puzzles, Sudoku, and other solo games will get your creakygears going. Apps like Lumosity, Peak, and Elevate also offer clever activities to engage yourmind.Show yourself kindnessYou have a lot going on physically, mentally, and emotionally during pregnancy and after a littleone is born. Don’t beat yourself up if something slips your mind or you can’t seem to snap outof it. Learn to forgive when you forget, and try to find humor in the situation.TakeawayPregnancy brain could have you feeling less than sharp. You might make a few mindlessmistakes or temporarily lose your ability to think clearly, but, in time and with patience (andsleep), you will feel like your quick-witted self again.In the meantime, recognize that there are real mental, physical, and physiological reasons whythis is happening. It may even be your brain’s way of helping you transition into the all-consuming, totally overwhelming, and amazingly wonderful world of motherhood. Andthatissomething worth remembering.Last medically reviewed on June 11, 2020Parenthood Pregnancy Pregnancy HealthHow we reviewed this article: Share this article SOURCES ()! " READ THIS NEXT A Guide on What to Eat DuringPregnancyByAdda Bjarnadottir, MS, RDN (Ice) What you eat during pregnancy is important for your health, aswell as the health of your baby. Here are 13 foods you should ea…when you're pregnant.READ MORE' Tracking Kick Counts Was MakingMe Anxious. Here’s Why I StoppedFeeling the baby move is one of the most exciting parts ofpregnancy. Until it's not. For me, that moment came when…counting kicks turned from a…READ MORE' Is Painting During Pregnancy aGood Idea? Medically reviewed byCarissa Stephens, R.N., CCRN, CPN Painting while pregnant carries certain risks for your baby. We'llgive you some ways to make it safer, but keep in mind that…breathing in paint fumes…READ MORE' What to Know About HavingSyphilis During PregnancySyphilis during pregnancy is a serious condition, and you'll bescreened for syphilis at you first prenatal visit. Syphilis can affect…babies…READ MORE' Does Midwives Brew Work toInduce Labor Safely?Medically reviewed byMeredith Wallis, MS, APRN, CNM, IBCLC Midwives brew is a castor oil-based drink said to induce labor.We'll tell you what's in it and if it's safe and effective.READ MORE' How to Predict Your FertileWindow and Use It to Help GetPregnantMedically reviewed byValinda Riggins Nwadike, MD, MPH Predicting your fertile window can help you know when you aremost likely to get preganant. There are signs like temperature a…mucus changes that…READ MORE' Preconception and What It Meansfor PregnancyPreconception is the name of the stage of pregnancy that occursbefore you are actually pregnant. It's a time to prepare for…pregnancy and see a…READ MORE' Is Tea Safe During Pregnancy?ByAlina Petre, MS, RD (NL) Many may believe that tea is probably safe to drink whilepregnant because it's natural, but that's not necessarily the case…This article discusses…READ MORE' Maternal Health Outcomes in theU.S.Are Dire: Healthline’sCommitment to AdvancingMaternal Health EquityAs part of Healthline's 2023 social impact commitment tomaternal health equity, we embarked on research to uncover ke…gaps in health information and…READ MORE' Pregnancy Signs Before a MissedPeriodMedically reviewed bythe Healthline Medical Network Sensitive breasts and nausea are some of the earliest signs ofpregnancy.READ MORE' ADVERTISEMENT Medically reviewed byTimothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD— By Lauren Barthon June11, 2020 ADVERTISEMENT related stories A Guide on What to EatDuringPregnancy TrackingKick Counts WasMakingMe Anxious. Here’sWhyI Stopped IsPainting DuringPregnancya Good Idea? What to Know AboutHavingSyphilis DuringPregnancy Does Midwives Brew WorktoInduce Labor Safely? ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT !" %#) ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Was this article helpful?Yes No ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT ! "#$ %Get our wellness newsletter About Us Medical AffairsFilter out the noise and nurture your inbox with health and wellness Contact Us Content Integrityadvice that’s inclusive and rooted in medical expertise. SIGN UP Privacy Policy Newsletters Enter your email Privacy Settings © 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Ourwebsite services, content, and products are forinformational purposes only. Healthline Media does notYourprivacy is important to us Advertising Policy provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Seeadditional information.See additional information.Health Topics About | Careers | Advertise with usOUR BRANDS Healthline Medical News Today Greatist Psych Central Bezzy 