2 Log in | Register Cart! Home All Journals Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology List of Issues Volume 41, Issue 1 Memory and a!ective changes during the .... Enter keywords, authors, DOI, etc This Journal !Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology " Volume 41, 2019 -Issue 1 Advanced search Submit an article Journal homepage Review Article Views 543 Memory and affective changes during the antepartum: A narrative review and integrativeCrossRef citations to date hypothesis Sarah J. Ouellette # & Elizabeth Hampson Altmetric Pages 87-107 | Received 21 Dec 2017, Accepted 31 May 2018, Published online: 05 Jul 2018 $ Cite this article % https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2018.1485881 -Full Article . Figures & data / References $ Citations 0 Metrics 1 Reprints & Permissions Read this article ABSTRACT Introduction and objectives: Many women report diminished memory function during the second or third trimesters of pregnancy, but objective neuropsychological tests often fail to show any decrement in performance. The present paper systematically reviews published studies that have investigated this phenomenon over the past 25 years and considers newer studies showing that a"ective changes occur during gestation in a subset of pregnant women. Method: A systematic search was conducted to identify articles relevant to pregnancy and memory function. Articles published since 1990 that included a nonpregnant comparison group were retained for review. Results: A literature review of studies using objective memory testing suggests that a mild antepartum decline in explicit verbal recall occurs in some women. There is little empirical support for objective changes in semantic or implicit memory during pregnancy. Findings for working memory are mixed, with evidence supporting both decrements and enhancements. Inconsistencies in the literature potentially re#ect a moderating in#uence of pregnancy-linked depressive a"ect on cognitive performance, not simply domain speci$city, as previously suggested. Conclusions: Diminished memory function may occur in a speci$c subset of pregnant women who display depressive symptoms associated with pregnancy. !!KEYWORDS: Cognition depression maternal adaptation memory pregnancy & Previous article View issue table of contents Next article " Acknowledgments EH held a Chair in Women’s Health from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Ontario Women’s Health Council. Disclosure statement No potential con#ict of interest was reported by the authors. Additional information Funding This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Research Chair in Women’s Health) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada [grant number 2015-03662]. Related research 'People also read Recommended articles Cited by 8 A review of the impact of pregnancy on memory function Julie D. Henry et al. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology Published online: 29 Nov 2007 ""How do memory and attention change with pregnancy and childbirth? A controlled longitudinal examination of neuropsychological functioning in pregnant and postpa... Dustin M. Logan et al. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology Published online: 12 May 2014 ""Memory in pregnancy. II: Implicit, incidental, explicit, semantic, short-term, working and prospective memory in primigravid, multigravid and postpartum women " P. Casey et al. Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics & ,Browse journals by subject Area Studies Arts Behavioral Sciences Bioscience Built Environment Communication Studies Computer Science Earth Sciences Information for Authors R&D professionals Editors Librarians Societies Keep up to date Register to receive personalised research and resources by email ( Sign me up # ) *+ Economics, Finance, Business & Industry Education Engineering & Technology Environment & Agriculture Environment and Sustainability Food Science & Technology Geography Global Development Open access Overview Open journals Open Select Dove Medical Press F1000Research Health and Social Care Humanities Information Science Language & Literature Law Mathematics & Statistics Medicine, Dentistry, Nursing & Allied Health Museum and Heritage Studies Opportunities Reprints and e-prints Advertising solutions Accelerated publication Corporate access solutions Back to top Physical Sciences Politics & International Relations Social Sciences Sports and Leisure Tourism, Hospitality and Events Urban Studies Help and information Help and contact Newsroom All journals Books Copyright © 2024 Informa UK Limited Privacy policy Cookies Terms & conditions Accessibility Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067 H5 owick Place | London | SW1P 1WG 