Find a Doctor Conditions & Treatments Locations Academics Search New Patient Appointment IMedBlog Your Pregnancy Matters s ‘pregnancy brain’real or just a myth? January 26, 2016 Robyn Horsager-Boehrer, M.D. Laura Lacritz, Ph.D. Obstetrics and Gynecology Psychiatry “Pregnancy brain.” “Baby brain.” “Momnesia.” These terms often are broughtup while joking about pregnant women being absentminded. Thisphenomenon also has long been storyline fodder for television sitcoms. Forexample, it came up on “Modern Family” once when Sophia Vergara’spregnant character mistakenly puts soap in the fridge and butter in theshower. But is pregnancy brain real? We answer some common questions we get andoffer advice to lessen the effects of pregnancy brain. As many as 50 percent to 80 percent of pregnant women report experiencing memory What is ‘pregnancy brain’? problems during pregnancy. “Pregnancy brain” refers to a pregnant woman’s forgetfulness during and shortly after pregnancy. This can range fromforgetting why you went into a room, putting objects in strange places, forgetting to do things, and general absentmindedness.Is pregnancy brain real or a myth?Both! As many as 50 percent to 80 percent of pregnant women report experiencing memory problems during pregnancy.However, reports of memory problems during pregnancy are likely more common than the presence of actual memory deficits. Research studying actual memory deficits in pregnant women has been mixed. Some studies have shown no differences onstandardized memory testing, while others have found differences in some aspects of memory. Reviews of multiple studieshave concluded that some real differences in memory during and shortly after pregnancy can be seen, but themechanisms are not well understood. In the studies that have shown a difference, not all parts of memory were affected. In particular, memory function that requiresmore effort appears to be the most vulnerable during pregnancy. For example, some studies have shown that pregnant womenare as able as non-pregnant women of the same age to learn and recognize information, but they have a harder time recallingthe information later. However, the differences were fairly small.What causes pregnancy brain? While pregnancy hormones do affect the brain, thinking capacity and actual brain function is not thought to change duringpregnancy. But priorities change, as do many bodily functions and lifestyle factors that can impact your thought process. Theseinclude hormonal alterations during pregnancy and birth, changes in plasma levels of neurotransmitters such as serotonin anddopamine, mood shifts, and sleep disruption. It has been suggested that memory change during pregnancy is evolutionary. Some researchers think pregnancy brain helpswomen forget about other things and focus on caring for their new baby. Most pregnant women spend a lot of time thinkingabout the new child and how their lives will be different. Increased stress can leave pregnant women feeling forgetful andabsentminded. How long does pregnancy brain last? Perceived memory changes can occur at any point during pregnancy and in the postpartum period. The physical fatigue thataccompanies the first trimester also can include cognitive fatigue, which means your attention and memory can suffer. Aspregnancy progresses, there are many things vying for expectant mothers’ attention, which can result in things beingoverlooked or “forgotten.” There is only so much information any of us can focus on at one time, so it is normal for things to fall through the cracks. Afterbirth, sleep deprivation and mood changes can contribute to cognitive changes in a mother who is now multitasking more thanever. How can you overcome pregnancy brain? Help your brain! Use lists. Daily “to do” lists and other reminders can help you stay on track.Sleep when you can. Your body is working hard, and you need rest. After birth, sleep is disrupted and sleep deprivationcan have cumulative effects, so rest when you can.Simplify your life. What can you delegate, drop, or take a break from? We all want to be Superwoman, but there is onlyso much we can do – and do well – so back off from things you don’t have to do.Ask for help. Family, spouses, friends, and co-workers will be happy to give you a hand. Don’t worry. Stress can make memory problems seem even worse. Becoming preoccupied by minor memory lapses canover-sensitize some women to normal, minor variations in memory.What can partners, family, or co-workers do to help?Ask how you can help! And then be willing to help if the offer is accepted. Some tips to assist the pregnant women in your life: Help minimize stress by picking up some of the slack at home or in the office.Don’t point out or be critical if something falls through the cracks.Be supportive. Acknowledge the increased demands of pregnancy and parenthood.Should you worry about pregnancy brain? If memory lapses have you worried or if they are causing severe anxiety, talk with your physician. Your care provider canevaluate whether there are other causes of your memory problems that need intervention. Don’t feel that you need to hideyour experience from others. Talk with other pregnant women and your doctor to determine what’s normal and what, ifanything, you have to worry about. If you thought you were going crazy because your memory nose-dived when you became pregnant, you’re perfectly normaland in good company. Follow our advice to give your brain a break during and after pregnancy. The next time you arestruggling to remember everything you need at the grocery store, stop to make a list, or better yet, sit back and ask yourpartner to do the shopping. You’ve got more important things to focus on! Have you experienced pregnancy brain? What did you do to get through it? Share your stories and tips on Facebook or Twitter. More in: Your Pregnancy Matters, pregnancy NEXT ARTICLEStudying the connection betweenanxiety and preterm birth More from Your Pregnancy Matters Mental Health; Your Pregnancy Your Pregnancy Matters Aging; Men's Health; Your Matters Why pregnantwomen Pregnancy MattersStudying theconnection shouldresist ‘vaccine Howdoes a father’s age betweenanxiety and fatigue’ affect fertility andababy’s preterm birth Robyn Horsager-Boehrer, M.D. health?David Nelson, M.D. January 9, 2024 Leen Al-Hafez, M.D.Heather Fisher, M.S.February 9, 2024 October 13, 2023 •••More Articles Share:New Patient Appointment or 214-645-8300 or 817-882-2400 The future of medicine, today. Getting Care Institution Find a Doctor Why UT Southwestern Conditions & Treatments Make a Gift Locations Careers Clinical Trials Texas Links General InquiriesPhysician Referrals Site Policies 214-648-3111 Contact Us Non-Discrimination PolicyPrice Transparency © 2024 The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Member of Southwestern Health Resources Main Location5323 Harry Hines Blvd.Dallas, TX 75390 